Title: If you’re a leader in tech, “non-technical” is not a free pass 
Date: 2019-04-21
Tags: Communications
Slug: non-technical
Summary: There’s a specific use of the term “non-technical,” and that’s applying it to oneself, as a cop-out. If you’re a leader in tech, you don’t get to do that.

The excellent [Josh Simmons](https://joshsimmons.com/) recently
[implored people on
Mastodon](https://josh.tel/@josh/109955068395820670)
to stop using the term “non-technical” when talking about another
person’s skill set. And as far as that term is often used as a
put-down of others, I am *completely* with Josh. Belittling someone
because they work in documentation, corporate leadership, marketing,
middle management, PR, advocacy, legal (etc. etc.), and because you
consider yourself somehow superior because you’re in a “technical”
role — that has got to stop, yesterday.

However, I would like to amend his plea to also decry the use of the
phrase _about oneself,_ as a cop-out. I am talking about people in
leadership roles saying “I’m not technical” or “I’m not a tech
person” to allege that they have bigger fish to fry, and cannot be
reasonably _expected_ to understand technical detail.

And that has to stop yesterday, too.

**Leadership roles exist that *require* understanding of technical
detail.** If you’re the CEO of a tech company, you need to understand
the technology your company makes. If you’re in charge of a product,
you need to understand the technology that makes up that product. And
even if your company’s core business has nothing to do with
technology, but _you_ are in charge of something that does, you need
to understand that technology.

Now of course it’s nigh impossible to understand every bit of
technology that you need to make decisions on, in its every intricate
detail. But you *will* be faced with decisions that do boil down to
*specific* technology details. And then, it is incumbent on you to
know as much as you need to know, to make an *informed* decision. This
is a core element of a leadership position, and it makes up at least
part of your income differential versus a person who is a subject
matter expert in their field, but doesn’t manage other people.

**Whenever you have an issue to decide on that you don’t understand,
get someone to explain it to you.** It’s perfectly fine to say “I know
nothing about this bit of technology, please give me your simplest
explanation that will enable me to make a decision.” But you don’t get
to say “I’m not a technical person” and use that as a pass for, and
perpetuation of, your self-inflicted ignorance.

(By the way, the same is obviously true in reverse. Say you’ve got the
tech-person perspective and someone from legal comes up to you with a
question on licensing or patents or international contract law that
you know zilch about? Same thing. “Please give me your simplest
explanation of this matter that will enable me to make a decision.”)

There is a recently popular spin on the “it’s OK to be non-technical”
cop-out argument, which is to over-emphasize communication skills over
tech skills. It starts with a truism — a person’s technical skills
provide little benefit unless paired with communications
proficiency. But then this is frequently flipped to claim that
technical understanding can be *replaced* with communications skills,
because the former allegedly *pales* in importance versus the latter.

Let me break something to you: **except in the rare case of a job
where someone works entirely on their own and also has no customers,[^1]
communication skills are *every* person’s most important skills.** *Yes of
course* your communication skills are more important than your tech
skills, because they’re literally more important than
anything. 

However, **if you’re a great communicator but you don’t know what
you’re talking about, all that makes you is a bullshit peddler.** And,
if you’re actually incapable of listening to experts who are able and
usually very willing to explain a complex matter to you, maybe you’re
not such a grand communicator after all, either.

So if you’re in a leadership position that is even remotely
tech-related, and you’ve ever used “I’m not technical” as a free pass
to not understand things, stop. It isn’t.

[^1]: Yes I am aware that this is exceedingly rare.
