Title: Slidecraft updates
Date: 2019-12-13
Slug: slidecraft
Tags: Conference
Summary: I’ve been doing public talks and presentations rather frequently for the last 10-or-so years, but this year I made significant changes to my process for creating, rehearsing, and presenting talks.

I’ve been doing public talks and presentations rather frequently for
the last 10-or-so years, but this year I made significant changes to
my process for creating, rehearsing, and presenting talks.

## What I used to do

When I started doing talks a while back, I followed an approach that
many of us were at some point either taught, or adopted by emulating
our peers:

* I would roughly sketch an outline,

* then I’d create slides (usually on a company or conference template),

* then I’d add some speaker notes in bullet-point fashion,

* then I’d rehearse the talk,

* and finally I’d refine my content based on whether I was short or
  long in terms of the available time slot.
  
That’s a very conventional approach, and it tends to focus very much
on getting the slides right.

Today I do things differently.

## What I do now

I’ve come to the conclusion that what I really want my audience to
focus on is what I am *talking* about. So now, I do this:

* I still start with a rough — *very* rough — outline.

* Next though, I write my speaker notes. All of them. Yes, that means
  I write out my *entire* talk, and this may well take days.

* Then, I do a first practice run. Is there a good natural flow? Will
  it make sense to someone completely unfamiliar with my topic? Is the
  story I’m telling logical?

* Then, I edit. This process of alternating rehearsal and edits
  continues until I’m reasonably happy with the whole talk, and I have
  timed it and am happy with my pacing, too.

* Only then do I start creating my slides, and I usually completely
  disregard conference templates, for reasons I’ll get to in a moment.

Yes, that means that when I ultimately deliver the talk, I’m actually
reading from my notes. Except when I’m just riffing and ad-libbing
over them. Chances are, unless you know me very well, you’ll be unable
to tell. That’s because I write my notes like I talk, and I pay more
attention to flow and stress and rhythm than I do to grammar and
exactitude. [This talk](https://youtu.be/ruehcRDRIgM), just like
[this](https://youtu.be/ZifNGprBUTA), and
[this](https://youtu.be/cRqA-eYYOXE) were all delivered from fully
written speaker notes.

Fully writing out my talk has also enabled me to greatly reduce my use
of [fillers](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Filler_(linguistics)) (like
“ah” and “um”), which I used to say excessively and which would make
me cringe at my talk videos.


## Accessibility

Now to explain why I normally disregard conference templates: In
preparing and delivering my talks, I try to put a greater emphasis on
accessibility that I used to before.

* my slides are now all high-contrast. I default to using [black text
  on a white
  background](https://fghaas.github.io/cookiecutter-presentation/#/3)
  (this is a good default for when I have reason to assume the
  projection equipment will be less than perfect), alternatively I use
  white text on a black background (for darkened rooms).

* I try to accommodate people with the most common types of color
  blindness: I use blue — as opposed to red or green – as my highlight
  color, and in
  [charts](https://fghaas.github.io/cephalocon2019-rbdmirror/#/8/2), I
  differentiate by both color and line stroke. I also try to refrain
  from using animations. As for slide transitions, I use only fade, no
  motion.

* I publish my slides ahead of time, include a QR code at the very
  beginning, and I use reveal.js Multiplex so that my slides advance
  in unison with those one people’s phones, tablets, or laptops. This
  way, people with less-than-perfect vision (or simply seated in an
  unfortunate spot, at the back of the room) can follow along easily
  and at their own preferred zoom level.

* The published slides include a menu with a theme switcher. This is
  to accommodate another group of attendees, namely photosensitive
  people who cannot stare at bright screens for a long time (this can
  trigger intensely painful migraines). A person who is photosensitive
  can follow along on their own device, using the dark theme.

* Since my speaker notes are fully written out, this means that I can
  also [include
  them](https://fghaas.github.io/cookiecutter-presentation/#/intro) in
  the published material, so that my notes can act as subtitles for my
  speaking. This can come in handy to people who are hard of hearing,
  or who are simply unaccustomed to my accent or manner of speech.

I’ve rolled these accessibility considerations into my opinionated,
[Cookiecutter](https://cookiecutter.readthedocs.io/)-based reveal.js
[presentation
generator](https://github.com/fghaas/cookiecutter-presentation).

## A request

If you happen to be visually impaired, or color blind, or hard of
hearing, or you work with people who are – in other words, if you can
make a suggestion for me to improve the accessibility of my slides,
*please* [file an
issue](https://github.com/fghaas/cookiecutter-presentation/issues)
against my Cookiecutter and I’ll try to work that in as best I
can. Thank you!
